Welcome to the program.
You've been listening
to some of the reporting
just just airing just before you
and you obviously seeing everything
that's going on around you.
Tell me first,
what has been going through your head
and your heart since October 7th?
Well, since
October 7th,
everything has changed in some ways
and in other ways.
Everything is
my my worst fears are coming true.
I as you mentioned,
I fought in Gaza in 2014.
That war was also preceded by a horrific
terrorist attack,
just like we saw on October 7th.
Three Israeli teenagers
were kidnaped and murdered,
which led to a oh, don't worry
sorry story
which led which led to a horrific
which led to the firing of rockets.
A massive crackdown on Hamas
in the West Bank
and the firing of rockets and
then a ground invasion.
The the images that
everyone is seeing that I'm seeing
remind me very vividly of that fighting.
And frankly it's it's my worst fears
because many people colleagues
in the Israeli peace camp in the Israeli
anti-occupation camp
have been warning
for so many years
saying that
there is no military solution.
We can't just manage the conflict
and maintain a very, very brutal
military
regime of control over Palestinians.
That actually plays
into the hands of Hamas
and plays
into the hands
of these murderous terrorist groups.
And so all I've been doing since then
is trying to share my message, try
to share my experience,
and try to avoid making the same mistakes
that we made in 2014
when Hamas only got stronger
after we bombed them and killed thousands
and we struck them a decisive blow
where that's at least
what I thought at the time.
But I only saw afterwards
that my own government
strengthened Hamas.
You know,
it's pretty intense to hear you say that.
Look,
we know that
the majority of your country
right now is in favor of this war.
They might not be in favor
of the current government,
but they definitely believe
that somehow, somewhere
Hamas has to be defeated.
You're saying
it can't be done militarily.
Tell us.
I guess the first question
really is to you.
Are you out of step
with the majority of your country people
right now?
And are you able still to talk about,
you know, what you saw,
what you feel,
what you've learned, how you've changed,
Yeah.
Well, I'll add,
you know, I'm not a I'm not a pacifist.
I believe that Israel
has the responsibility to defend itself.
Against Hamas.
And, of course,
that includes military actions.
But I think that right now
in Israeli society,
there's a debate going on
as to
whether this war that we're fighting
should be against Hamas
or it should it be against
the Palestinian people.
And you have
members of this current government
who have said
since the horrific atrocities
that we saw in October,
on October 7th against Israeli civilians
and the kidnaping of Israeli
civilians who are still being held
they have made it clear
that they aren't differentiating
between civilians and and Hamas.
Even last night,
a senior member of the coalition
sorry, on Saturday night,
senior member of the coalition
of a member of the cabinet,
Bezalel Smotrich,
the finance minister
and the minister overseeing
the West Bank
and the Ministry of Defense said
that he doesn't
really see
a big difference
between the Palestinian Authority
and Hamas.
The Arabs are the same Arabs.
So there are many Israelis
who disagree with that.
And there are many Israelis
who are questioning the assumptions
and questioning
the lies that they've been told
for so many years.
And maybe it is a majority
who has believed the lies that
our government has told us.
But, you know, I
think that this is an opportunity for a
for partners
of mine in the Israeli peace camp.
I saw
many of my.
Yes,
I can hear you
Let me ask you another question, Ben.
Let me ask you another question.
Okay, Ben.
See, your line is dropped.
We're going to redial you
and we're going to bring you back.
We're going to bring you back
So standby and we'll bring you back.
I want to ask you again about the op ed,
the article
you wrote
for The New York Times
describing what it was like
you know,
in the deployment in 2014 and Gaza.
You wrote,
you know,
that some of your soldiers
were feeling doubts at that time.
And then you wrote your own thoughts
on a piece of paper and you wrote this.
I wrote that
some members of my team had been tallying
the number of soldiers killed
and discussing
whether this operation
was worth the losses.
I think it could be worth it.
I wrote
as long as we decisively eliminate
the threat.
That's the lie they told us
and the lie that's being repeated today
that we can decisively eliminate
the threat of Hamas
through a military operation and see.
How did you come to the conclusion that
you couldn't
Well, you know, one of the voices
that I've listened to over the years
and I've been convinced
by is not just not just the voices
of human rights activists,
but also the voice of the former
head of the Shin Bet, Amy Ayalon,
who is the top counterterrorism expert
and for four
and a half years in the in the country.
And he said this openly.
He said,
the only way to decisively defeat
the terrorism that Hamas represents
is through creating an alternative
and creating hope.
And that means working
towards a political solution.
And our current government has been
fundamentally committed
to opposing a political solution
and to preventing the creation
of a Palestinian state
and preventing Palestinian independence.
So, therefore,
I that's why
I realize that
military alone will not defeat Hamas.
And that's why
I think that our government
needs to be changed immediately.
So let me ask you then as well,
because you talk a lot in your favor
of what you saw in Gaza in 2014.
Tell me,
because earlier
you said you don't believe
that the soldiers distinguish
carefully enough
between civilians and Hamas fighters.
What did you
yourself experienced to make you say that
Well, you know,
in the
area that we went,
we were told that
all the civilians had fled.
And that was true for the most part,
but it wasn't entirely true.
We did find civilians.
There was an entire family
in the second neighborhood
that my unit took over
was an entire family who stayed behind
And the soldiers,
you know, luckily
when they entered the house, they didn't
kill them through live fire.
They gave them food and water.
They guarded them for many days.
But when we pulled out,
the Air Force
flew overhead
and bombed the entire neighborhood.
And eight
members of that family were killed.
I learned this later.
So I've seen this with my own eyes
and I'm not.
And I'm listening today.
I'm listening to my own leaders,
including who I'm mentioned,
Bezalel Smotrich,
who said he doesn't really
differentiate between
the Palestinian Authority,
which recognizes
Israel wants to negotiate
with Israel and Hamas,
which is the terrorist organization
that carried out these atrocities.
The Arabs are the Arabs.
That's what he said on Saturday
night on Israeli television.
So it's hard for me to believe.
I don't believe that
I've seen it with my own eyes.
I don't believe that Israel
is doing everything in its power
to prevent civilian casualties
based on the statements
of members of the Likud
and other members of the coalition.
And I think that that's
a result of the fact that this government
doesn't view
the Palestinian people
as the future partners
for making peace with.
And they are just convinced that
overwhelming military power
is going to bring us safety and security
and this is a catastrophic mistake.
It's the same catastrophic mistake
that led us to the horrific
events of
October 7th And
we absolutely need to change that.
We need our partners abroad.
We need the US government also.
I'm an Israeli, but I'm also an American.
And I expect that the American government
also not just pay lip service to the idea
of pursuing a political solution.
You know,
settlements are expanding
at an incredible rate.
Settlers are illegally taking over land,
not even according to international law,
according to Israeli law.
They're going out
and there are shooting at
Palestinian civilians
and there's no with impunity.
There's no real enforcement against them.
And so I think the our international
partners and allies
need to take a stance
on the side of the Israelis
who are
demanding political solution
and are demanding
differentiation, and that our government
makes sure not to harm and kill
innocent civilians.
Benzie, obviously,
they tell us endlessly
that they are doing their best,
but you can see
allies like the United States
are getting increasingly worried,
not to mention everybody on the ground
about the civilian toll.
There is there are stories
a lot
about dissent being quashed in Israel.
Are you not worried
about what you're saying to me
publicly now,
being accused of siding with the enemy
and the kind of things
that are getting some Israelis in trouble
You know,
it's it's a risk
that I have
to take
for the future of the people of Israel.
You know,
siding with the enemy would be ironic
for my government to accuse me
after my government
in order
to prevent a Palestinian state
actually facilitated
the transfer of hundreds
of millions of dollars to Hamas
and preferred to bolster Hamas
and to de-legitimize
the Palestinian Authority
and Palestinian
human rights organizations.
They designated
Palestinian human rights organizations
as a terrorist organization
that they categorized
Palestinian
diplomatic initiatives as Palestinian,
as diplomatic terrorism.
But Hamas,
they facilitated the transfer
of hundreds of millions of dollars,
and they also crushed
Palestinian hopes of independence,
which also fed the fuel of Hamas,
because that's what Hamas
is the enemy of peace.
And when our government committed itself
to preventing a peace process
and preventing negotiations,
they were actually helping Hamas.
Ben Sanders, thank you very much.
And what you've just said
has been
confirmed by by very many people.
And obviously, we know that governments
were encouraged
to try to make Gaza and Hamas
sort of economically
okay,
thinking that the threat had subsided.
But clearly,
we know that it had not been easy.
Sanders Thank you very much.